---
layout: post
title: "Dynamo DB"
tags: [distributed-systems]
---

# DynamoDB

This paper was assigned as a class reading for CSE 452, but I didn't read it. When I started interning for Amazon, I had to query from Dynamo and became frustrated that it didn't follow the relational model and didn't provide me with a way to query by non-primary keys. At the same time I started reading "Designing Data Intensive Applications". So, I decided to come back to this paper to learn more.

## Background

Amazon initially used a relational database, but found that it wasn't cutting it for their use case. Amazon needed to guarantee very high performance for customers. This meant fast updates when customers add to cart, checkout, browse, etc. Practically, the _service level agreement (SLA)_ was the concrete, measurable commitment (latency, uptime, throughput) that Amazon's architecture had to satisfy.

> E.g. Provide a response within 300ms for 99.9% of its requests for a peak client load of 500 requests per second.

Traditional relational databases favored _consistency_ over _availability_. One example was the `JOIN` operator. On a single machine, `JOIN` is efficient. But in a distributed system, we need to collect the matching data across all nodes, meaning that the success of the operation depends on the availability of all of those nodes.

The main requirement is highly available writes. Conflicts can be either resolved at the application layer with some custom resolution logic (e.g. merge conflicting carts), or at the database layer with a rule like "last write wins".

With DynamoDB, Amazon chose _availability_ over _consistency_. With the issue of `JOIN`, DynamoDB eliminated this problem by _partitioning_ data with the same keys into the same nodes, and also getting rid of the `JOIN` operation. This meant that queries no longer depended on the availability of many nodes.

### Definitions

- **Consistency**: Querying any of the distributed databases will give us the most up to date answer. However, we might have to wait for the system to update.
- **Availability**: We don't need to wait for the system to update, and the system will always return an answer immediately (if the node is not down). However, this answer may be out of date.

## Resources

DeCandia, Giuseppe, Deniz Hastorun, Madan Jampani, et al. “Dynamo: Amazon’s Highly Available Key-Value Store.” _SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev._ 41, no. 6 (2007): 205–20. [https://doi.org/10.1145/1323293.1294281](https://doi.org/10.1145/1323293.1294281).
